Hello, everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Decent. I'm your host, Ricardo Lobs. And today I'm
joined by Dr Aaron Lukaszewski. He is associate professor
in the Department of Psychology in the Center for
the Study of Human Nature at California State University
Fullerton. And today we're talking about personality from an
evolutionary perspective. So, Doctor Kazy, welcome to the show.
It's a pleasure to everyone. Pleasure to be here.
So, uh tell us first from an evolutionary perspective,
how do you approach personality? I mean, theoretically speaking,
how do you basically think about personality, personality traits
and things like that?
Yeah. Well, I mean, there's, there's a uh at
least two kind of distinct questions there um from
my standpoint. And so the, the first question um
would, would be, how do you approach the evolution
of individual differences? Um And, and to sort of
reconcile that with the existence of a sort of
universal uh you know, species architecture. Um And then
the second question is, um or a second question
could be um you know, the sorts of trait
constructs that are the units of analysis in personality
psychology. Um How do you go about studying uh
those particular kinds of traits, um you know, versus
taking other approaches. Um Now, when it comes to
the first question um about just the existence and
origins of uh of individual differences and variation. Um
I mean, when I came into the field um
in the two thousands, um and, and started uh
doing my doctoral work in the Center for um
Evolutionary Psychology um at U CS B. Um YOU
know, just, just in the prior decade or so.
Um There had been um several, you know, what
I consider to be seminal papers um that sort
of laid out um the theoretical foundations for how
to um approach the study of personality and individual
differences um by uh to be cosmides. Um And
uh David Buss and Dan Nettle. Um And then
in grad school, there was a seminal paper that
came out on the evolutionary genetics of personality um
by uh Lars Pena, uh Jeff Denison and, and
Jeffrey Miller. Um And so all of those um
foundations were kind of my starting point and my,
um you know, my uh uh inspiration that got
me into this um area of study. But um
you know, what they were interested in, I mean,
so, you know, the, the, the puzzle from an
evolutionary um standpoint um regarding the existence of individual
differences is that natural selection um as it selects
for uh the uh fittest variants um tends to
reduce um uh phenotypic and genetic variation, right, um
directionally um acting over time, right? So, uh but
nonetheless, um you have a variation abounding in natural
populations um with individuals varying in all sorts of
um different parameters. Um And so, you know, uh
the, the, the sort of evolutionary psychological framework overall
entails the assumption that um that humans are uh
character best characterized as a sort of constellation of
um species typical uh evolved um uh systems, right?
Uh EVOLVED behavioral regulation systems. And so, um you
know, the question is, is, you know, what's explaining
um the the the the existence of the variation.
Um AND there are a number of different proximate
and ultimate explanations that these earlier papers um identified,
right? So, uh you know, um t being cosmides
had emphasized um the role of just sort of
uh genetic noise in creating um personality differences, right?
So, um pathogen host cou uh is going on
um and sort of constantly um you know, the,
the the pathogen host cou arms race are constantly
changing, which genes promote optimal, uh you know, uh
pathogen resistance from generation to generation. Um And those
genes also have uh impacts on all kinds of
other things, right? Um And so that can result
in psychological and behavioral variation that is, that is
not itself um functionally or adaptively patterned um in
any way. Um And, and then you always have
mutations um being introduced um into, to reproducing populations.
So that's another source of sort of noisy um
genetic variation. Um And so, you know, the argument
uh that they put out is that they put
forth is that, you know, the sort of default
assumption about the existence of variation should be that
it's fundamentally noisy, right? Um And, and not really
um functionally patterned um right, but they also acknowledge
and other people um elaborated the, the, the, the
viewpoint that um natural selection can also um create
and maintain um individual differences um uh through a
variety of, of different um uh ultimate mechanisms, right.
So, um fluctuating and, or balancing uh selection um
on a, on a pit of continuum, for example,
um uh can uh can, you know, create differences
across space or across time um and sort of
average um distributions of uh of, you know, some
behavioral or psychological um dimension or, you know, of
course, morphological as well. Um And, and so you
can have natural selection, actively maintaining um a variation
in a, in a variety of ways. Um And
so, you know, sort of outlining all of those,
you know, possibilities um uh was, was a major
um you know, contribution of this, of this, of
this work in the nineties and two thousands. Um
And so that's where I came into the field
and um you know, and started uh studying personality
now at that time, um you know, the, uh
you know, the, the most sort of tractable starting
point was to say, OK, personality psychologists um have
figured out um uh you know, the, the sort
of main dimensions of personality that exist um by
doing lots of um you know, sophisticated uh psychometric
stuff and um quantitatively rigorous um uh you know,
Multivariate analysis and, and so on. Um And so
I started with the extra version uh continuo um
and, and looking at it um sort of in
a functional framework saying, OK, uh the, the, the
broad assumption um that guiding all of this, this,
this work is that um there can be um
tradeoffs between the costs and benefits um of different
uh trade levels, right? So, looking at the extraversion
continuum, right, individuals who are high in extroversion, um
you know, tend to uh seek status uh and
social attention um form relationships with, with lots of
people. Uh AND um you know, build coalitions, uh
draw attention to themselves, et cetera. Um And people
who are lower on the extroversion continuum um you
know, are, are less interested in uh in, in
those aspects of social life um and less interested
um in, in, in status uh and so forth,
right? So, uh looking at the empirical associations that
existed between um you know, the extroversion continuum and
various life outcomes um and how people spend their
time uh then, then you can come to some
ideas about, you know, um what, what um uh
factors in the environment, right? Or elsewhere. In the
phenotype, um might be uh modulating the, the magnitudes
of those costs and benefits along the continuum. Right.
Uh And then you can get some, some traction
on uh hypotheses about what might be, um what
extroversion might be adaptively patterned in relation to. Right.
For example, we found that um physically stronger, um
especially men, um uh tend to be higher in
extroversion because they're more likely to get the benefits
of extroverted strategies and less likely to pay some
of the costs, right? Like uh coming into conflict
with other people. Uh And so on, right? Um
So, uh that was, that was my sort of
uh entry into evolutionary personality science.
So there's lots of things to break down there.
Let me ask you perhaps first this question, uh
how do you approach personality traits? Uh uh I
mean, from an evolutionary perspective, do you think of
them as adaptations or if not, what is exactly
the kind of approach you have to them?
Right. Um So I think the answer to the
question is um yes, no. Um uh IT'S um
possibly the wrong question, but it's also possibly the,
the, the right question. Um And uh so what
I mean by that is it, it depends on,
um which uh uh you know, depends on what
you mean by personality and it depends on what
you mean by adaptation um in those contexts, right?
So, um in, uh you know, in the previous
um section we were talking about, you know, there,
there can be non functionally, non adaptively patterned um
individual differences uh and variants. Um And so, in
those cases, you're talking about um psychological and behavioral
variation um that is not adaptively patterned and not
therefore generated by sort of an adaptive mechanism. Um
Right, you can also have um uh individual differences
whether um you know, based inheritable variation um or
uh or generated through um a sort of a
system of faculty of calibration, um a species typical
mechanism that generates variation contingently, um uh then you
can have individual differences that are um adaptively patterned
um and would qualify as some sort of adaptation.
Um uh RELATEDLY, there's the question of um the
personality traits that, that exist as the units of
analysis and um personality psychology um right, are, are
those adaptations? Um And, you know, are they actually
um kind of identifying um you know, unitary dimensions
of phenotypic variation um in the first place. Um
And so I think that uh my answer to
that is that the, the systems that generate the,
the personality concepts um and possibly many of the
personality concepts themselves um are adaptations, right? Um IN,
in the sense that we have uh an evolved
psychology of person perception and prediction, right? Um uh
A personality assessment system, right? So, um the personality
assessment system is designed to uh you know, to,
to represent um dimensions along which people vary in
functionally significant ways. Um So, in differences between people
that matter for me and deciding how to interact
with them. Um And, you know, uh I importantly,
it's, you know, natural selection can favor a system
that, that creates heuristic personality concepts and uses them
to make decisions about other people. Um Even if
those concepts um are not really accurately mapping on
to um uh you know, the specific ways in
which people differ from each other or the, or
the mechanisms that are generating uh the variation. Right.
So, um so, you know, these heuristic trait concepts
can, can, you know, if they have greater than
chance predictive utility, then natural selection can presumably um
uh favor them. Right. So, um so yes, I
think uh there, there are many open questions, by
the way, um about our evolved psychology um of
person perception um and prediction. Um uh So we
have all these trait concepts, um sociable, conscientious, assertive,
et cetera. Um Right. And now it's, it's, it's
quite possible that many of these things are uh
that many of these concepts are kind of cognitive
universals. Um But then, you know, there are, but
some may not be right. And there, and there
are also questions about uh you know, uh even
if they are cognitive universals, in other words, you
know, everywhere and every human uh population, um there
exists um a concept that can be translated um
you know, into any language and so forth. Um
You know, are, are those really sort of preprogrammed
in some way, um, genomic uh pre specified um
in their content? Right? Um Or are there more
basic conceptual primitives from which those are reliably, you
know, emergently built um across development? Um uh So
anyway, there, there are, there are various open questions.
Um uh But yes, I, I think that we
haven't evolved um psychology of person perception or difference
detection. Um uh YOU know, as uh as David
has called it. Um So II, I don't know
if that answers your question.
Yeah. Uh uh LE let me ask you another
kind of question now. So since we have different
kinds of personality inventories, and I guess that at
least in the West, the most common one mo
uh in personality side psychology is the big five.
And then also the ex uh for example, uh
I, I mean, uh uh would, should we expect
for any kind of personality inventory to be at
the basis of an evolutionary approach to personality or,
but basically how do you deal with the personality
inventories that we have? And do you expect that
any of them would be universal or not?
Um I mean, I think, uh I, I think
that there is um pretty good evidence that something
like the big five or big six, you know,
uh it tends to replicate across um highly industrialized,
um urbanized societies, right? Um uh And um the
evidence is, is much less strong that um that
those personality taxonomies generalize in their, in their Multivariate
structure to uh you know, smaller scale populations, um
indigenous uh communities. Uh AND, and, and so on.
Um And uh you know, there, so in, in
thinking about this, um you know what i it's,
it's important to ask the question, what is a
personality taxonomy? Um And where do they come from?
Right? Because the methods by which they're derived are
very important for thinking about the ontological status of
the resulting dimensions, right? So, um in personality psychology,
um these, these broad taxonomies that you're referring to
um were created through um the what's called the
lexical approach, right? Which is to um basically start
with a comprehensive um set of uh in this
case, English um personality trait descriptors. So trait descriptive
adjectives, um and then later corresponding, you know, statements
designed to, you know, uh uh you know, capture
the content of those adjectives. Um uh So, to
have, you know, many tens of thousands of uh
trait descriptive adjectives um have people rate themselves on
these rate other people on these. Um And then
um use factor analysis to identify the uh roughly
um independent dimensions that are defined by inter correlations
among these trait descriptive adjectives, right? Um And, and
they're, they're sort of designed, they're trained to be
um roughly statistically independent dimensions so that you just
minimize the overlap. Um And you know, among the,
the, the marker dimensions in question. So, for example,
the big 50 you know, um and you know,
so this is um this is how they, they
come to these um these uh taxonomies in the
first place. Um And you know, so the indi
the the individual um personality concepts and corresponding sort
of lexical descriptors um of uh of the, the,
you know, that go on to these dimensions. Um
It could be the case that those exist um
everywhere, right? Um That, that the specific personality concepts
have a lot of universality, right? But what's in
question is whether at the population level um the
uh you know, the, the big five factor structure
actually winds up mapping onto the co variation patterns
um in, in all kinds of societies. I don't,
I don't see um a good a priori reason
to expect that that would be the case. Um
Just given that, I mean, what's, you know, the,
the patterns of co variation reflect patterns of phenotypic
variation? And so if the um if, if the
traits that exist on different axes in factor of
factor space, um you know, are caused by different
things, then it, you know, if in different ecologies
with different um ecological configurations and, and so on,
um I think you can get all kinds of
different patterns of, of co variation. Um And um
so this was an idea that was tested by
um you know, Mike Gurin and Chris Von Roden
and their colleagues um uh where they took the
most commonly used um big five psychometric instrument, the
BF I. Um And um so Mike um is,
is one of the key figures involved with Theman
uh life history project. Um And um uh so
they, they work with a, a group of um
indigenous um foreign horticulturalists in Oblivion, Amazon. And um
so what they did is they went to uh
Timane land and they, they took the BF I
and they translated it from Spanish uh into uh
the indigenous language and, and back uh and then
they um administered um the 4444 of the um
items in the, in the BF I uh to
hundreds of people, um hundreds of Timane uh uh
residents. Um And they did this through kind of
a uh an interview format uh where they, because
they're not, they're not accustomed to using um you
know, like liquor type scales of 1 to 5
and, you know, circle, circle and number kind of
thing. Um But they, they did a sort of,
you know, some of that. Um And uh what
they found was that the big five factors solution
uh was nowhere to be found at all. Um
The, the, the factor structure looked very, very different
um in the Timane um than it does in
any uh you know, uh weird society. Um And
what they found instead was, you know, provisional evidence
for um a Timane big two as they called
it, right? Which is, I mean, that was a
very tentative labeling. Um But uh two broader dimensions
um that were, that were defined by items from,
you know, uh heterogeneous uh big five dimensions. Um
So, no, I mean, I think the, the evidence,
um the evidence from those sort of uh ethic
studies suggest that, you know, the big five does
not replicate everywhere. Um And, and nor do I
think we should expect it to. Um INCREASINGLY there's
a work by, for example, um Amber Thaler and
Gerard Saucier, and they're looking at, they're, they're building
sort of more, more emic um you know, personality
taxonomies that are specific to indigenous communities. Um And
uh you know, it, you know, it's, it's difficult
to imagine a world where you have just an
emic taxonomy that only applies to uh you know,
a single population. Um But nonetheless, it, you know,
they, it underscores the same conclusion that uh we,
we don't see a ton of universality and like
the, the population level correlation structures. Um So,
yeah. Uh I mean, just to mention also that
if listeners or viewers are interested, I also have
on the show, an interview from 2018 with Doctor
Louis Goldberg, one of the big names behind the
development of the big five personality traits inventory. And
also uh you mentioned there, Michael Gervin and Chris
Van Rood and I also have interviews with them
and also with Gerard Socio. So if people are
interested in learning more about the kinds of things
and the research you're mentioning there, I also have
interviews on that. So um but when it comes
to what explains interpersonal variation in personality traits from
an evolutionary perspective. So I if I remember correctly,
for example, in your first answer, you mentioned briefly
how physical formidability might contribute to levels of extraversion.
And I would imagine that would be classified as
a contextual factor. And in your previous answer, you
also mentioned things like ecological factors. So, uh of
course, I would imagine that many different kinds of
factors play a role here. But what would you
say are perhaps some of the kind, the main
kinds of factors that explain uh variation in personality
traits?
Yeah, I mean, I think, um you know, there's,
there's been work on, um you know, for example,
uh cross cultural, cross societal variation and the homicide
rate, right? Um AS an indicator of kind of,
you know, environmental harshness and specifically, you know, levels
of, of violence and, and uh you know, and
how that tracks, you know, average levels of, you
know, uh paranoia and trust and uh you know,
behavioral aggression and, you know, things that would be
functionally related to um you know, uh cross cross
societal variation and, and homicide risk. Um uh There's
also been work on um the role of pathogen
prevalence um in uh driving patterns of a variation,
right, where you have higher um pathogen prevalence, you
have lower, for example, extroversion because it increases the
costs of, you know, interacting with lots of people
um to have a lot of disease risk uh
neurology. Um And um you know, we've also done
work on uh the niche diversity uh hypothesis um
which uh which is more about um uh explaining
why we seem to, it, it, it, it may
be the case that there's, there's less uh there's,
there's more co variation um in societies with a
smaller number of social and occupational niches um than
uh than in um uh you know, weird societies
where, and there's a lot of niche diversity, right?
There are many, many different um specializations, social and
occupational specializations um that uh that each have a
different sort of optimal incentivized, Multivariate personality profile. Um
And so, you know, um the, the work we've
done is pretty provisional and there are alternative explanations
um for the patterns we've documented. But uh you
know, when we have nation level, um uh proxies
for societal niche diversity, right? You see uh niche
diversity um across societies being inversely related to uh
the, the, the overall sort of amount of co
variation you, you observe in those um societies. And
that was sort of an explanation that came out
of speculating about what explains the, the Tsimane results
um from Mike Gurban study, right? Um What explains
why we see so much more co variation and
the Shimane. Um AND it's differently configured um on
top of that. Um And so, uh this is
sort of a general explanation that came out of
uh you know, that that particular uh observation.
So uh earlier, you've also mentioned how it seems
that there's more or, or there seems to be
more uh a variation in personality traits uh across
traditional societies. Let me ask you specifically about word
you've done uh in Colombo Ecuador with a group
of horticultural foragers. Uh What did you study there
and tell us specifically, I guess about calibration and
fitness linked correlates of personality.
Yeah. Um So this is, uh this is work
in Kambo Ecuador, um which is a community of,
uh, you know, horticultural foragers. Um And um this
is the field site of John Patton and Brenda
Bowser that they've maintained for, you know, three decades
or so, um uh making regular visits um back
to collect data. Um And, uh you know, in
this case, so John um tragically passed away uh
a year and a half or so ago. Um
And so this, these were data we collected, um,
you know, before that, of course. Um And um
this, uh I mean, the idea of the study
was to just actually get sort of pilot data
on, you know, testing, um uh you know, replication
and extension of, um some of my personality findings
um in, in Kambo and, you know, we were,
we were thinking we would, you know, uh build
that out and, you know, do a bunch more
with a sort of more comprehensive personality, um taxonomy,
emic and etic and all that. But, you know,
um unfortunately, uh yeah, uh uh that's not happening
at the moment. Um But yes, so in this
study, we, we, we just had three personality uh
concepts, um three dimensions of personality that were sort
of taken from the Hexaco and big five taxonomies.
And our questions were um first, you know, do
these personality concepts exist um in the minds of
Kambo villagers? Um And um uh you know, and
then also do, you know, can we reliably uh
assess those um you know, individual differences in, in
those personality traits? Um And do they uh do
they track the things that they theoretically should um
fitness link outcomes in this case? Um uh FERTILITY
and status in the community? Um And uh are
they predicted by um uh physical strength um which,
which John um had a way of collecting in
the field? Um So, uh you know, the, the
basic, the, the provisional answer to the question of
do these personality concepts? Um BASICALLY um uh fearfulness,
um extroversion and immodesty. Um YOU know, do they
exist in Kambo? And the answer was yes, because
there were translations of those into the indigenous languages.
Um A a second test of that was um
uh well, it it came out of the um
reliability um of people's rankings of each other on
those dimensions. So um this was a method that
um that John uh you know, was was involved
in kind of creating but uh he uses a
photo ranking um task that sort of round robin
in the community, right? So all the men uh
will rank each other um on a given personality
concept, let's say extraversion, right? Um INCLUDING themselves. And
they do this by, they have a photo of
each um each, each person in the community and
then they arrange them from highest to lowest um
on a given dimension. Um And everybody does this
uh for everybody else. Um And, and so you
have a lot of data going into each personality
score. Um And you can also assess, do people
agree, right? Um Is there inter ranker agreement? And
so the inter ranker agreement was uh was quite
high for um both um extroversion and um and,
and modesty. Um uh And um among both men
and women. Um And then those in turn, were,
were predicted by men's physical strength, um physically stronger
men um even controlling for age and other things
um were higher and extroversion. And uh and in
immodesty which was highly correlated with extroversion. Um AND
uh and, and men higher in um extroversion and
immodesty had more uh offspring. Um And uh the
same basic patterns. Um ASIDE from the physical strength
uh uh correlation um were observed for women. So,
um right, so these are, are, you know, the,
the together the data suggests that um these specific
personality concepts sort of, you know, in this case,
imported from the big five and Hexaco taxonomies um
exist with common meaning in the minds of Kambo
villagers. Um AND individual differences on those dimensions um
appear adaptively patterned um in relation to physical strength,
which is a hypothesized calibrator of those dimensions. Um
And um uh and in terms of fitness linked
outcomes, right, um personality was especially strongly tied to,
to status, right? Extroversion and immodesty correlated with um
with social rank in the community very, very strongly.
So, uh in a more sort of broader question,
do you think that there are broader lessons about
personality traits that we can learn from studying this
sort of more traditional societies?
Uh Yeah, absolutely. Um I, I think that um
uh I mean, there's, there's a lot of value
in just um you know, testing the consistency of
both the content of the personality concepts um uh
and the, the correlations with outcomes in people's lives.
Um AND so on um in as many, you
know, diverse ecologies as possible, um uh especially when,
um but, you know, the, the, the hypothesis in
question being tested, um posits, you know, uh you
know, species typicality or, you know, some kind of
universality. Um So that's, that's always inherently valuable. Um
And, you know, I think we can also learn
a lot about the development of personality concepts um
by, uh you know, testing, um you know, the
universality of those. Um And, uh you know, and,
and also looking at, you know, um cases in
which a given personality concept doesn't seem to exist
uh in a particular society, then the question is
why, um and you know, why does it seem
to exist in lots of other societies? Um uh
And, and then, um and then there's the question
of personality structure um uh which uh you know,
um which is to say, or do the patterns
of, of correlation among different uh aspects of personality
um replicate similarly in, you know, in, in all
societies. Uh OR is there um just too much
variation to uh to even start creating a human
specific taxonomy of personality dimensions?
So uh in one of your papers, uh I
read you arguing that in personality science, it would
be important for us to distinguish between the three
different key goals, namely, description, prediction and explanation. I,
I mean, could you explain each of those goals
and why do you think it is important for
people to distinguish between them?
Yes. Um So the, the paper you're, you're talking
about was written by a whole bunch of authors.
Um And it came out of kind of a
think tank uh workshop. I think it was in
2018. Um And uh it's important to note that
uh the all the authors might not agree with,
with every statement in the paper uh when, when
you have that kind of a, you know, a,
a mission statement. Um But I, I do agree
in general that, that those are distinct goals, right?
That you have uh you know, the the goal
of description. Uh So here was my, I'll just
start with my problem with, with that. OK. So
um think about like Venn diagram space, you have
description prediction and explanation, right? Um So explanation is
about uh you know, doing really what I'm probably
most interested in, right, which is uh looking at
the uh the, you know, identifying the mechanistic underpinnings
of the variation that gets captured in personality constructs.
Um And that's what a lot of other more
social cognitive um personality scientists are interested in doing
as well and functional functionalists of various kinds. Um
Then you have the people who are interested in
prediction um which is to say, you know, they
might even be skeptical that you can uh infer
mechanistic explanations uh uh uh in in some cases
or, or question the value of doing it because
what they're interested in doing is basically using essentially,
you know, machine learning type models to just sort
of figure out uh you know, what data can
we collect about people that allows us to predict
stuff about their behavior and their life outcomes. Um
And you know, and you know that goal, the
prediction goal on its own, you might not care
if you're accurately carving up the human phenotype at
its joints. Um AT all, right. Um As long
as you're able to forecast what's gonna happen um
and increase the sort of incremental uh prediction, right?
Um So, so that's that goal. Um And then
you have description which overlaps with both of those,
right? Um But my question was always the part
of description that doesn't overlap with either prediction or
explanation. What good is it? Um And uh you
know, on its own as an intrinsic uh goal
that's irrelevant to either prediction or to explanation. But
I think really the answer winds up being that
you, you gotta start, you know, in, in some
cases, it's useful to just start with description. Uh
And then maybe later on it, it becomes apparent.
Um YOU know, which, which things that were described,
uh you know, do have some kind of uh
utility in, in describing or explaining or predicting or
explaining uh if that uh if that makes any
sense? Mhm
uh But, but do you think uh I mean
here ju just to be perhaps a little bit
more concrete, do you think that if people do
not keep in mind the distinction between these three
different kinds of goals, perhaps there would be problems
for personality science in terms of how people theorize
about personality and personality traits and how they approach
methodologically, the study of each of these three kinds
of, uh, goals.
Yeah, a, a absolutely. And I mean, I think,
um, you know, uh a lot of times a
parent disagreement comes out of the fact that, um,
that people have different, different, different goals in mind.
Um AND so therefore disagree about, you know, which
methods are appropriate. Uh And which types of theoretical
frameworks are, are useful. Um And which inferences are
warranted. Um uh So, you know, I mean, I
think, uh you know, to me it's, it's difficult
to imagine um like not caring about explanation, like,
you know, my uh you know, my professional focus
is sort of trying to map the contents of
human nature. Um uh And, you know, um figure
out what kind of ape we are. Um And
um you know, with, with the, with the goal
of pure prediction, um you know, you don't necessarily
uh care about that at all. Um And in
fact, if, you know, you would discard potentially um
a uh a better mechanistic explanation, um that's, that's
more accurate, closer to the truth or whatever um
uh in favor of, you know, a model that
can uh that can predict stuff, you know. Um
So, uh so, yeah, I think people do, you
know, just, just keeping in mind that um a
given research program uh might have goals that are,
although within the domain of personality, um, fundamentally kind
of different and in some cases there's non overlapping
parts of, uh, you know, of, of those goals.
Uh, BUT, but, I mean, it's not a problem
if different researchers tend to focus their research and
personality on one of these key goals. Right. It's
just that they probably should keep in mind that
the other two are also important if we want
to have and develop a full understanding eventually of
how human personality works.
Right. Yeah, absolutely. Yes. Um Yeah, I think as
long as people are, you know, are clear about
what their goals are. Um THEN uh then it's
all great, you know, I mean, I think a
lot of the work being done by, by people
who don't care about an explanation um is really
impressive and interesting and, you know, uh quantitatively powerful
and uh and all those things and, and also
um has applications in, you know, real world contexts
and organizations, you know, organizations want to know about
these things. Like they don't care if, if you're
like getting the science of the mind right they
care about. Can you tell me, you know, you
know, which of these of people is gonna be
the best in this role, you know. Um And,
and I'm not saying that everybody doing that is,
is getting it wrong. I'm just saying it's irrelevant,
right? Whether, whether you're accurately identifying the sort of,
you know, uh important personality characteristics, that map on
in a clean way to underlying mechanisms or something.
Um uh They, they, they simply don't care and
nor should they, right. Um They're focused on, on
the bottom line. Um So,
uh so in your work, I've also read about
the general factor of personality. Could you tell us
what it is and if it is useful as
a construct in personality science?
Yeah. So the general factor of personality um refers
to uh the correlations um among the big five
dimensions, right? So I mentioned before the big five,
the big five personality traits are designed to be
orthogonal, which is to say uncorrelated with each other.
Um But nonetheless, uh you get correlations among them,
uh no matter how hard you try not to
um basically with, you know, uh psychometric surveys. Um
AND those correlations are all positive um uh positive
correlations directionally except for neuroticism which correlates negatively um
with the rest um or several of the other
ones anyway. Um And so the, the, the general
factor of personality uh is it captures the common
variant shared by all of the big five personality
dimensions. Um Now, I don't think it's an unreasonable,
um you know, possibility in a given population that
there would be, you know, uh overlap between, you
know, some, some overlap at the population level uh
between these dimensions. Um uh But, you know, uh
you know, it's also possible that, that we're looking
at a methodological artifact of, um, of the psychometric
instruments being used to collect, uh, the self ratings
or the ratings of other people. Right. Um, AND,
and so there's, there's a, I haven't tracked the
debate super closely but there's a debate between, uh,
people who think the GFP is real and reflects
some kind of, uh, you know, general awesomeness factor
of human personality. Um, AND then there, uh, there
are people who, who, who think there's, uh you
know, the evidence, the way that the evidence suggests
that it's a methodological artifact um that should not
be treated as a, a substantive personality contract. Um
And uh you know, the same would be true
for uh the um still higher order but lower
order. So for example, there's um alpha and beta
uh which are just below the big the, the,
the the general factor of personality, right? Um And
those reflect specific um you know, combinations of correlations
uh beneath the, the, the general factor. Um And
what relations do they correspond to? Exactly.
So if off the top of my head, remember,
I think um uh beta is represents a positive
correlation between extraversion and openness and um and, and
alpha represents a co a correlation the, the inter
correlations among the other three dimensions. Um THE other
three big five dimensions. Um And uh you know,
and, but then again, they both correlate positively with
each other. Um WHICH that's the, the GFP, the
general factor of personality Um, so I don't, I
think my, my true answer to the question is,
I don't know if I care. Um, IF the
general factor of personality is real. Um, uh, AND,
and that's, that's only because I don't, I, I
don't know if there is an answer to it.
I think, um, there might, those phenotypic dimensions with
whatever be, whatever is being captured by them, might
those things correlate a little bit in some populations
at least. Uh Yeah, sure. Um That's reasonable. Um
uh You know, and, and you might also see
populations in which they're totally uncorrelated. Um When you
look at the actual phenotypic variation, um you know,
uh apart from the measurement um measurement error. Um
SO I'm not really sure.
Uh BUT if the GFP is real, wouldn't it
be sort of analogous to the G factor when
it comes to intelligence or not?
Yes. And that's very much how, uh how the,
you know, some of the proponents of the GFP
uh think of it, right? Uh They look at
it as sort of a interpersonal effectiveness factor, right?
Um As I said before, sort of how awesome
is your personality. Um uh I mean, all, you
know, the GFP basically captures having AAA socially desirable
personality, right? Uh But that also plays into the
alternative explanation that socially social desirability biases in responding,
for example, uh could create the, the GFP or
other higher order factors as an artifact, right? Um
IT'S, it's harder to argue that uh the Psychometric
G factor, uh you know, the intelligence G factor
um is a, is a, is a method artifact
because many of the tests, you know, uh are,
are, you know, scored in entirely different metrics and
you know, it just to have sort of non
overlapping um task demands and things like that. Um
But with, with the GFP, you're always looking at
um correlations on uh you know, scales measured in
a, in a, in a common metric. So method
artifact will always be a sort of alternative explanation.
Um But my sense of people's assessment of the,
of that debate is that the method artifact, people
have won. Um uh And um uh you know,
but of course, there's still some, some holdouts. So
uh and uh OK, so uh just another question
about it, do you think that if it was
real, the general factor of personality that perhaps uh
people who work on the big five or even,
for example, the EXEC would have to perhaps uh
rethink how they approach uh those personality traits because
usually we hear from them that they vary independently
from one another. But if a GFP was real,
I mean, would that still be the case?
I don't really think so because the correlations are
pretty weak. Um And uh it, it, I think
it depends on what you're trying to do with,
with the, the, the, with the dimensions in in
the trade taxonomy, right? Um Now, you, you mentioned
you had Lou Goldberg on um uh you know,
I think that the original, you know, goal of,
of creating the big five was not to identify
like actual dimensions of phenotypic variation. Um But, but
to sort of provide what they called marker dimensions
in factor space, right? Just because what, what it
was a solution to was the sort of jingle
jangle problems. Um uh SO called jingle jangle problems,
which means you have all these um personality psychologists
out there each studying their own individual trait contracts
and then it turned in, in their own research
traditions and then it turns out that a bunch
of those are pretty much the same thing, right?
Um Just with different names and different groups of
people um studying them, right? And so they said,
well, this is crazy, you know, um we, we
need to have some like, you know, common agreed
upon, um you know, multidimensional space where we can
locate any particular, you know, uh trait construct as
existing on or near uh or perhaps independent from
um one of these like higher order marker dimensions,
right? So, thinking about it like that, you know,
I think um it's not really a problem uh
if, you know, if the, if the marker dimensions
don't wind up being entirely orthogonal to each other.
Um You know, we, we did a paper um
uh that also came out of that, that same
think tank I referred to um led by David
Kah and, you know, that had to do with
creating uh personality taxonomies um sort of from the
bottom up. Um AND not trying to impose a
lot of higher order structure um onto them, right?
Um Now it's still, you know, you still want
to avoid um jingle jangle uh type issues, right?
Um And have some sense of, you know, the,
uh the, the, the content independence, um you know,
of the different constructs uh in, in the overall
taxonomy. Um But it would allow for uh you
know, a more sort of granular view of, of
the units of analysis and also just, you know,
provide more plasticity and thinking about, you know, uh
does this aspect of personality to this other aspect
of personality? Um YOU know, and are they, how
overlapping are they and things like that? You know,
you could, you could have it, you could have
that vary, right? Um ACROSS different populations, right? Which
I think is more consistent with the complex reality
um of uh uh you know, of personality space.
So I, I think we have time to get
into one last topic here. Uh I mean, on
a different topic, uh you've also done work on
social status in human societies and the sort of
costs and benefits of high social status, of course,
the benefits from an evolutionary perspective uh seem more
or less obvious because it usually translates into fitness
benefits, higher fitness, uh, I mean, all of that
kind of stuff. But, uh, could you tell us
basically what are the main benefits and also perhaps
less intuitively, what are the costs of high social
status in human society?
Yeah. Um, WELL, right. I mean, you, uh, you
hit the nail on the head, identifying the benefits.
I mean, uh, the evidence is, is, um, you
know, is pretty strong that having high status um
in, at the community level um in, in pretty
much any human society is associated with a range
of, you know, privileges and prerogatives. Um And you
know, how many people uh count you as an
ally and support you in coalitional, you know, situations.
Um AND uh and also with, with your reproductive
success um and, and health and all kinds of
other uh you know, uh correlates. So, um so
yeah, I mean, Chris Vonruden um and Adrian Yei
have um probably the most comprehensive um analysis of
this. And I mean, they're looking just at um
well across primates, but a phylogenetic sort of meta
analysis across uh male primates, including humans in, in,
in uh smaller scale societies. Um And um you
know, in, in general, yes, men uh well across
primates, male primates, um if you look at the
correlation between rank and reproductive success in nonhuman male
primates, like the average correlation is something like 0.7
or 0.8 right? Um It basically tells a story
of like, you know, for, if you're a male
primate, a nonhuman primate, pretty much the only thing
that you, that matters for your reproductive success is
your rank in, in the social hierarchy. Right? Um
Now, you know, for humans, that's, that's watered down
quite a bit. Um Right, because uh there are
various mechanisms across human evolution that have created um
you know, what we refer to as leveling. Um
Right, because as uh as humans, um you know,
uh evolved a psychology that allowed them to um
well, first depend on each other through various forms
of mutual aid. Um And uh and, and also
to reason flexibly and in sophisticated ways about um
you know, uh coalitions. Um AND, you know, with
the, with the aid of the use of grammatical
language and so on, um it, it became um
uh much less viable for uh a high ranking
male um to just take everything for himself, right?
Um TO just take all the matings with fertile
females. Uh AND, you know, and keep all the
good stuff and um you know, impose costs on
others, um you know, uh indiscriminately um right, because
uh subordinates could, could, could band together and um
you know, collectively have more formidability than any individual
bully, right? Um And so consequently, uh in human
societies, you see a much weaker correlation between uh
attained social rank and um reproductive success. Um And
uh you know, but it's still, I mean, it's
still a valuable thing to have, right? High status
is still reproductively valuable for, for human males, which
is kind of one of the take home takeaway
messages. Um But uh you know, and we, and
we saw that as well in the Kambo um
data um with, with higher ranking men having more
kids and higher ranking women having more kids. Um
And um uh but anyway, so um what question
am I addressing here? What are the benefits? Yes,
but yes, there are costs, right? I mean, if
you are, um you know, uh if you're unlikely
to get the benefits of having high status because
you're unlikely to achieve high status, right, then, you
know, investing in the, in the pursuit of status
um is uh it's a misallocation of resources, right?
Uh Right, there are opportunity costs of, you know,
status pursuit activities um because you're doing that and
not other stuff um that might actually generate benefits
for you. Um Right, and so especially costly if
you never, if you never actualize those benefits. Um
And you know what we were talking about a
moment ago, I mean, much of the um you
know, the work I've been involved with in um
in social status um has been about uh the
acquisition of status, right? Um The different pathways there
are to, to, to having to attaining high rank
um in, in human communities. Um And, you know,
so before, uh you know, in the 19 eighties
and nineties, if you were studying human hierarchy, um
you were kind of importing like a primate model,
right? Uh And, and you would tend to refer
to, you know, dominance hierarchies, right? And think about
um hierarchy uh just purely in terms of, of
dominance um and, and intimidation and coercion. Um uh
WITH the assumption being that the highest, you know,
the alpha male will be the, you know, the
most badass uh male, right? For example. Um And
then in uh you know, in 2001, um uh
Joe Hendrick and Gil White um wrote a paper
uh that was a major contribution because um it
introduced uh you know, in human groups, the, the,
the concept of prestige based hierarchies, right? Um That
uh in humans, you also have freely conferred um
deference um to prestigious individuals, right, who are perceived
as having value for gene, you know, generating benefits
uh for others in the community or having special
talents that, you know, uh you know, people want
to learn from, for example. Um And so this
was a pathway um to high status in human
groups. Um THAT was sort of phylogenetic um relatively
unique. Um And, you know, so, so introducing the
dominance, what, what became the dominance, prestige model um
of social hierarchy uh was um you know, was
a major advance. Um WHAT we have, you know,
sort of been in some discussions in the literature
about is uh the extent to which dominance as
defined in the dominance prestige model um really exists
in any pure form um in human communities at
all. Right. In other words, can an individual, um
uh you know, uh just purely through coercion, um
illicit deference from others that results in some meaningful,
you know, elevated status uh within uh human community.
Um And, you know, uh what we've, um you
know, sort of po uh what, what we've um
argued is that uh when you have behaviors that
look dominant, assertive, aggressive, you know, and things like
physical formidability, um uh uh predicting social status and
how much social status other people think you deserve.
Um It's mediated by the fact that strength can
be used for, for both good and uh and
evil, right? Um uh So, you know, um physically,
uh mo more formidable individuals um can use their
formidability to generate benefits for um the community, right?
By uh you know, um you know, for example,
punishing cheaters and free riders. Uh AND, you know,
uh incentivizing other people to do what they're supposed
to do. Uh And uh and so on, right?
Um And so, it's not necessarily the case when
you see, uh you know, in the dominance, prestige
literature, um especially as it's applied in other disciplines
and so on, it's very much the assumption that
if you, if, you know, if you're high in
dominance based status, you've got where you are through,
um you know, imposing costs on others or threatening
to and, and people are backing down to you
out of intimidation, right? But as I said before,
humans have, you know, subordinate leverage uh in, in
virtually every community and organizational context, right, where subordinates
can band together and uh prevent um aggressive individuals
from uh right from taking what they don't deserve.
Um And so, you know, uh the question, you
know, we've been posing in the literature and, and
uh you know, providing analysis to uh sort of
highlight is um you know, this sort of prestige
via dominance model seems to be able to explain
a lot of the observed correlations between um dominant
traits and attain status, right? Um Now, we don't
necessarily think that that dominance based status is impossible
or that it doesn't exist, right? And, but in
the, I mean, it probably comes down to semantics
because it depends on how you define, uh you
know, status, for example, right? Um If status is
something that has to be sort of collectively acknowledged
and sort of given to you, right, then you're
very unlikely to get it through purely dominant and
coercive tactics. Um Right. And uh but, but if,
if status is defined as, for example, just having
a reputation for being a bad ass that you
don't want to mess with, right, then, uh you
know, then, yeah, sure. Uh DOMINANCE based status certainly
would exist Right. Um, YOU can have a reputation
for being, you know, uh, being formidable and someone
you, you don't want to mess with. Um, BUT
still, you know, maintain decent, you know, uh, relations
in the community. Ok. Um, IT doesn't mean you're
gonna be the highest ranking person at the community
level politically or whatever. Right. Um, BUT you would
have a form of dominance based status. Um, SO,
yeah, the work we've been doing with um yeah,
uh Patrick Dukey and, and David buss and Jim
Rooney and Cameron Anderson has been uh just trying
to, you know, uh you know, break the concepts
of dominance, prestige down into their um sort of,
you know, constituent components.
Uh But uh I, I mean, I'm not sure
if you touched a lot on the cost side
of the question there. So if someone has high
social status in human societies, either through dominance or
through prestige, what might be some of the costs
that they might incur?
Well, I mean, I think the, the, so the
costs um it's mostly net benefit, right? So if
you're, if you're um you know, a high ranking
person in, in a human community, um uh you
know, there are costs, right? But uh you know,
so for example, um everybody wants stuff from you
all the time, right? Uh You sort of have
an obligation to uh you know, perform certain political
roles usually. Um I mean, it's gonna be obviously
highly variable whether you're talking about an organization context
or, you know, a small scale community. Um AND,
and then across small scale communities. But, you know,
it's gonna tend to be the case that if
you have high status, um you have obligations, right?
Um You know, you have implicit or explicit obligations
to other people in the community uh to intervene
in third party conflicts um to uh you know,
again, provide political leadership um to mediate uh conflicts
between households, um possibly in some cases to, you
know, to, to provide right, to give up resources
when other people are without, right? And, and so
all kinds of things um uh that, that are
kind of expected of you. Now, if you're able
to maintain, you know, the, the the high ranking
position, however, uh by doing those things that yes,
come at a cost, right? Then the evidence suggests
that it's, it's worth it reproductively, right? Because you've
been able to attain high status and then you've
uh been able to uh you know, at least
probabilistically on average, um you know, cash in uh
on, on, on the uh investment, right? Um But
I mean, there, there probably are cases where, you
know, because of resource scarcity or whatever uh you
know, having high status just isn't worth it, right?
The juice isn't worth the squeeze. Um And, and
maybe some individuals wind up being, having high status
in the community over time and, you know, because
of all the obligation and, you know, everything else,
it just doesn't wind up paying off. Um You
know, uh so, yeah, I mean, I think, you
know, I'm, I'm talking about things in the aggregate,
right on average. Uh The data suggests that, you
know, uh it's really mostly benefit. Um You know,
once, once you, once you are in a high
ranking, you know, sort of position in the minds
of people in your community, uh this form of
kind of social capital is uh is net beneficial.
Uh But yes, comes along with various, it's a
double edged sword, right? Um uh Various obligations to
other people that you probably often wish you didn't
have.
Uh And I would imagine that uh at least
in some contexts being um high social status would
induce a lot of stress because of you having
to provide and having to intervene and having to
do stuff for other people to keep also because
the social that has to be maintained, right? And
I guess that's another aspect to it. It's not
just that you acquire it and it's there forever.
You have to maintain it as well.
Right. Right. Absolutely. Yes. You, you have to, you
have to make sure that you're maintaining your political
support uh for all the people that have, you
know, supported you, um you know, previously, uh and
don't run afoul of those people. Um And, you
know, uh you know, again, deal with deal with
the politics of conflict between your allies, you know?
Uh, FOR example. Right. Um, BECAUSE, you know, I
mean, whatever, if you lose both allies then that's
destabilizing. Uh, YOU know, I mean, even, even, uh,
you know, chimpanzees and, uh, pigtail macaques deal with
these kind of politics. Right. Um, WHERE, you know,
the alpha, alpha male needs to, to make sure
he at least maintains his alliances with the next
two ranking males or whatever, right? Um And, you
know, because they can decide to depose him, uh
you know, and, and, and frequently do um and
even alliances, you know, uh with, with females um
who can sometimes form multi individual uh you know,
uh revolutionary groups as well. Um So, yes, I
mean, the, the politics of, of, of, of human
hierarchy are um you know, are, are complicated and,
and, you know, it takes a lot of uh
time and, and energy and judi judiciousness to uh
to handle it properly.
Yeah. And the other aspect to it that I
was also just about to mention and you touched
briefly on there is the fact that uh in
humans and also other species as well. Um There's
always the risk that other individuals might come together
and coordinate to depose you, right? If they are
fed up with you, basically.
Yes. Yes, absolutely. Um And so those uh when
that happens, um Chris Bum uh referred to that
as a leveling coalition, right? Um uh BECAUSE what
it's, it's, it's, you know, function is to reduce
or eliminate the discrepancy in, you know, resource access
and, and, and so on to the benefits of,
of status, right? Um And, you know, in extreme
cases, you know, uh I mean, Richard Wrangham wrote,
wrote a book recently, uh you know, uh look
at, looking at the extreme case of when a
leveling coalition goes to targeted conspiratorial killing, right? Where,
you know, where, where the, you know, let's say
the alpha male is, is so uh uh disruptive
um and generates too few benefits. And therefore everyone
says, well, this guy has to go. Uh AND
um uh yeah, and they, they've also talked about
the role of um uh you know, this is
going back to Chris B and colleagues, but the
the role of projectile weapons too. Um Right, which,
you know, once, once humans had the ability to
create projectile weapons over harmed evolution. Um Right, then
this vastly reduces the cost of co-ordinated killing, right?
Because everybody can stand back at a relatively safe
distance, you know. Uh AND only one, you know,
spear needs to actually, you know, uh land on
target,
right. Yeah. But basically you no longer have to
be as physically formidable as the alpha male to
actually be able to kill him even alone sometimes.
Yeah. Absolutely. Yes. Um Yeah, and, and, and you
no longer have to be the most form, physically
formidable individual in the community to be the alpha
either, right? Because the way that you're getting there
is not necessarily fighting everybody else, right? You're probably
getting there by generating benefits for others and you
know, through alliances. I mean, there still is a
correlation in human, you know, communities between formidability and
uh attained rank. But it's again, nowhere near what
you would see in, in most nonhuman primates um
where the correlation is extremely strong. And if you
know, an individual is the alpha male, you, you,
you could probably say, and you know, with, with
pretty good uh uh probabilistic certainty that that will
be the most physically formidable individual, right? Um IN,
in the community.
Uh BY, by the way, uh just to, to
ask you this uh the Richard Rham book you
were alluding to is the goodness paradox.
Yes. The goodness paradox. Yes.
Yeah. I, I also have uh an interview about
that on the show, by the way. So, from
2019. So uh just before we go, would you
like to tell people where they can find you
when you work on the internet?
Um Yes. Uh I mean, Aaron lukaszewski.com, um I
probably shouldn't have used that, that web address because
you have to spell my name uh in order
to get it right. Um But, you know, uh
you know, uh I, I have a um you
know, both a personal and professional uh web page
um at Cal State Fullerton's Department of Psychology, there's
links to all of it. Um AND all my,
you know, publications are listed there, of course with,
with uh access to PDF S. So
great. So I'm leaving links to that in the
description of the interview when Doctor Lukaszewski. Thank you
so much for taking the time to come on
the show again. It was really fun to talk
with you.
Yeah, thank you. Pleasure.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by the N Lights
learning and development. Then differently check the website at
N lights.com and also please consider supporting the show
on Patreon or paypal. I would also like to
give a huge thank you to my main patrons
and paypal supporters, Perera Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick
Suno Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam Kel Matthew
Whitten B are no wt Ho Erica LJ Connors,
Philip Forrest Connelly. Then the Met Robert Wine in
NAI Z Mark Nevs calling Hol Brookfield, Governor Mikel
Stormer Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferger and H
her ma J and Lain Jung Y and the
Samuel K Hes Mark Smith J. Tom Hummel s
friends, David Sloan Wilson Yaar, Ro Ro Diego and
Jan Punter, Romani Charlotte bli Nicole Barba, Adam hunt
Pavlo Stassi Nale medicine, Gary G Alman, Sam of
Zed YPJ Barboa, Julian Price, Edward Hall, Eden. Broner
Douglas Fry Franca, Beto Lati Cortez or Sole Scott
ZFTD and W Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Giorgio,
Luke Loki, Georgio Theophano Chris Williams and Peter Wo
David Williams, the Ausa Anton Erickson Charles Murray, Alex
Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore Larry Dey, Junior,
Old Ebon, Starry Michael Bailey then Spur by Robert
Grassy Zorn, Jeff mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas Radick, Mark
Kempel, Thomas Dvor Luke Neeson, Chris Tory Kimberley Johnson,
Benjamin Gilbert Jessica. A week in the Brendan Nicholas
Carlson, Ismael Bensley Man George Katis, Valentine Steinman, Perras,
Kate Van Goler, Alexander Abert Liam Dan Biar Masoud
Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular Jer Urla. Good enough Gregory Hastings
David Pins of Sean Nelson, Mike Levin and Jos
Net. A special thanks to my producers is our
web, Jim Frank Lucani, Tom Vig and Bernard N
Cortes Dixon Bendik Mueller, Thomas Rumble, Catherine and Patrick
Tobin, John Carl Negro, Nick Ortiz and Nick Golden.
And to my executive producers, Matthew Lavender, Sergi, Adrian
Bogdan Knit and Rosie. Thank you for all